




https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Parashu#/media/File:Parashurama.jpg

Painting of Parasurama. He is shown crowned, two-armed and wearing sandals. Over his left shoulder he carries his defining weapon, the axe. An impression of perspective is provided by a lightly sketched-in foreground. On laid European paper watermarked with an armorial design and the letters 'W T'." Description from source: "From a portfolio of sixty-three paintings of deities and daily life. Paraśurāma, on whose forehead is Vaishnava Namam (emblem), is recognizable by the large parashu (axe) resting on his left shoulder, while his right hangs loosely by his side. His bulky figure is enhanced by the shading on his neck, chest and stomach. An angavastra (shawl) is draped over his elbows.



Permission details
This is a faithful photographic reproduction of a two-dimensional, public domain work of art. The work of art itself is in the public domain for the following reason:

Public domain	
This work is in the public domain in its country of origin and other countries and areas where the copyright term is the author's life plus 70 years or fewer.

Dialog-warning.svgYou must also include a United States public domain tag to indicate why this work is in the public domain in the United States. Note that a few countries have copyright terms longer than 70 years: Mexico has 100 years, Jamaica has 95 years, Colombia has 80 years, and Guatemala and Samoa have 75 years. This image may not be in the public domain in these countries, which moreover do not implement the rule of the shorter term. Côte d'Ivoire has a general copyright term of 99 years and Honduras has 75 years, but they do implement the rule of the shorter term. Copyright may extend on works created by French who died for France in World War II (more information), Russians who served in the Eastern Front of World War II (known as the Great Patriotic War in Russia) and posthumously rehabilitated victims of Soviet repressions (more information).


In Hinduism
The parashu named Vidyudabhi is the weapon of the god Shiva who gave it to Parashurama, sixth avatar of Vishnu, whose name means "Rama with the axe" and also taught him its mastery. Parashurama learnt Kalaripayattu from Lord Shiva who was the inventor of Kalaripayattu. Parashurama was the guru of Dronacharya, the guru who instructed the Pandavas in the epic of the Mahabharata. Bhishma and Karna, half brother of Pandava also took instruction in weaponry from Parashurama. Parashurama was known to have terrible temper having lost his father to the evil Kshatriya Kartavirya Arjuna (not to be confused with Arjuna of Mahabharata). Parashurama's weapon had supernatural powers. It had four cutting edges, one on each end of the blade head and one on each end of the shaft.

The parashu was known as the most lethal close combat weapons of the epics. It is also one of the weapons of God Shiva, God Parashurama and Goddess Durga and is still depicted on their idols throughout India. It is also one the weapons of Ganesha. It was also main weapon of Sahadeva and Shakuni

